Title : Lung cancer proteomics: recent advances in biomarker discovery.
Journal/Date : Int J Proteomics. 2011;2011:726869. Epub 2011 Sep 15.	 Pubmed Id: 22229091
Abstract : Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer death in both men and women in Western countries, with a 5-year survival rate of 15%, which is among the lowest of all cancers. The high mortality from lung cancer is due not only to the late stage diagnosis but also to the lack of effective treatments even for patients diagnosed with stage I lung cancer. Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify new markers for early diagnosis and prognosis that could serve to open novel therapeutic avenues. Proteomics can represent an important tool for the identification of biomarkers and therapeutic targets for lung cancer since DNA-based biomarkers did not prove to have adequate sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility. In this paper we will describe studies focused on the identification of new diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive markers for lung cancer, using proteomics technologies.


Title : Erlotinib in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer: an update for clinicians.
Journal/Date : Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2012 Jan;4(1):19-29.	 Pubmed Id: 22229045
Abstract : Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has become an important target in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Erlotinib and gefitinib, two small molecular agents that target the tyrosine kinase domain of the EGFR, were approved in many countries for the treatment of locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC as a second- or third-line regimen. Since then, randomized trials have evaluated the role of these two targeted agents alone or combined with chemotherapy in maintenance and first-line settings. This review summarizes the results of recent clinical trials with these tyrosine kinase inhibitors, with a focus on erlotinib, as first-line treatment towards a form of personalized medicine aimed at improving clinical outcome in advanced NSCLC.


Title : Evaluation of pencil beam convolution and anisotropic analytical algorithms in stereotactic lung irradiation.
Journal/Date : J Med Phys. 2011 Oct;36(4):234-8.	 Pubmed Id: 22228933
Abstract : The aim of this study was to evaluate differences in dose distributions in stereotactic body radiation therapy treatment plans for lung tumors calculated with pencil beam convolution (PBC) algorithm with modified Batho power law (MBPL) versus heterogeneity corrected anisotropic analytical algorithm (AAA) of the Varian Eclipse treatment planning system. The four-dimensional computed tomography images from 20 patients with lung cancer were used to create treatment plans. Plans used five to seven nonopposing coplanar 6 MV beams. Plans generated with the PBC algorithm and MBPL for tissue heterogeneity corrections were optimized to deliver 60 Gy in three fractions to at least 95% of the planned target volume, and the normal tissue doses for spinal cord, esophagus, heart, and ipsilateral bronchus were restricted to less than 18, 27, 30, and 30 Gy, respectively. Plans were recalculated with AAA, retaining identical beam arrangements, photon beam fluences, and monitor units. The pencil beam plans, designed to deliver 60 Gy, delivered on average 51.6 Gy when re-calculated with the AAA, suggesting a reduction of at least 10% to prescription dose is appropriate when calculating with the AAA.


Title : Effect of low-density heterogeneities in telecobalt therapy and validation of dose calculation algorithm of a treatment planning system.
Journal/Date : J Med Phys. 2011 Oct;36(4):198-204.	 Pubmed Id: 22228928
Abstract : Telecobalt machines are still prominently used for the treatment of a variety of cancer cases in developing countries. The human body is a heterogeneous composition of variety of tissues and cavities which vary widely in their physical and radiological properties. The presence of heterogeneities in the path of telecobalt beam presents an altered dose distribution in the region of clinical interests. A computerized treatment planning system (TPS) is generally used for calculating the dose distribution in the patient. Experimental measurements were carried out in a telecobalt beam with the objectives to study the effects of low-density heterogeneities and to verify the ability of the ASHA radiotherapy TPS in predicting the altered dose distribution along the central axis and off-axis of the beam. Locally available kailwood was tested for its lung equivalence and measurements were carried out in a polymethyl methacrylate phantom by introducing lung equivalent and air gap heterogeneities. A comparison of experimentally measured and TPS calculated dose values indicates that the TPS overestimates the dose by 11.6% in lung equivalent (kailwood) heterogeneity along the central axis. Similarly, it was found that the TPS overestimates the dose by 3.9% and 5.9%, respectively, with air heterogeneity of 1.0 and 2.0 cm. While testing the adequacy of TPS in off-axis region, it was found that the TPS calculation does not indicate the widening of the beam profile in the low-density heterogeneity region. This study suggests that the effective path length based algorithm of the ASHA radiotherapy TPS is unable to achieve the recommended 3% accuracy of clinical dose calculation in heterogeneous media.


Title : A simple plan evaluation index based on the dose to critical structures in radiotherapy.
Journal/Date : J Med Phys. 2011 Oct;36(4):192-7.	 Pubmed Id: 22228927
Abstract : The dose to critical structures plays a very important role in treatment plan evaluation and forms a major challenging parameter in radiotherapy treatment planning. In this study, a simple index, Plan Normal tissue complication Index (PNI) has been proposed for treatment plan evaluation based on the dose to surrounding critical structures. To demonstrate the proposed index, four different critical treatment sites that include the prostate, upper abdominal cancer, lung, and head and neck were selected for this study. A software progam (PNIcalc) has been developed to compute the PNI from the exported dose-volume histogram data and from the tissue tolerance data published by Emami et al. and Kehwar et al. The software also shows the parameters that exceed the threshold limits of dose-volume parameters presented in the QUANTEC recommendations (2010). In all the studied cases, PNI gave an overall picture of the dose received by the critical structures and also indicate the fractional volume exceeding the tolerance limit. The proposed index, PNI gives a quick comparison and selection of treatment plans that result in reduced dose to the critical structures. It can be used as an additional tool for routine treatment plan evaluation in external beam radiotherapy.


Title : Mediastinal lymph node dissection in early-stage non-small cell lung cancer: totally thoracoscopic vs thoracotomy.
Journal/Date : Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228841
Abstract : OBJECTIVESAlthough major pulmonary resections for early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are more and more frequently performed through thoracoscopy, the adequacy of lymphadenectomy achieved via this approach is still questioned. The aim of this study was to evaluate the results of lymph node dissection (LND) during totally thoracoscopic (TT) major pulmonary resections.METHODSClinical and pathological data of consecutive patients who underwent lobectomy or segmentectomy for clinical-N0 NSCLC between 1 January 2007 and 31 December 2009 were reviewed. The main evaluation criterion was the number of mediastinal lymph nodes (LNs) and mediastinal stations dissected through a TT approach when compared with the classical posterolateral thoracotomy (PLT) approach.RESULTSA total of 296 major pulmonary resections (278 lobectomies and 18 anatomic segmentectomies) for clinical stages I-II NSCLC were performed, 96 via a TT approach and 200 through PLT. Patients' clinical characteristics were similar in both groups. The overall-i.e mediastinal and lobar-number of dissected mediastinal LNs and of dissected mediastinal stations were similar in both groups (TT: mean +/- SD = 17.7 +/- 8.2; PLT: 18.2 +/- 9.3(P < 0.937) and 3.2 +/- 0.9 vs 3.4 +/- 0.9, respectively). The overall numbers of stations (TT: mean +/- SD 5.1 +/- 1.1; PLT: 4.5 +/- 1.2) and LNs (TT: 22.6 +/- 9.4, PLT: 25.4 +/- 10.8) were slightly but significantly different between the two groups (P < 0.001 and P = 0.033, respectively); there was no difference in terms of post-operative complications, although patients from the TT group had significantly fewer days with the chest tube (mean +/- SD = 4.0 +/- 1.8 vs 5.7 +/- 3.9, P < 0.001) and shorter length of stay (7.0 +/- 2.5 days vs 10.3 +/- 7.4, P < 0.001).CONCLUSIONSFor patients undergoing thoracoscopic lobectomy or segmentectomy for clinical early-stage NSCLC, the quality of mediastinal LND is equivalent to that performed by thoracotomy.


Title : Thoracoscopic segmentectomy for T1 classification of non-small cell lung cancer: a single center experience.
Journal/Date : Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228839
Abstract : OBJECTIVESSegmentectomy is one of the treatment options for small-sized non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although growing results support the feasibility and efficacy, it still remains unclear in segmentectomy. The International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer recommended a revised classification of TNM staging in 2009 (the seventh edition) and multidisciplinary classification of adenocarcinoma. We report here the outcome of totally thoracoscopic segmentectomy and lobectomy for T factor and adenocarcinoma.METHODSNinety patients with Stage IA NSCLC underwent thoracoscopic segmentectomy between September 2003 and June 2011. A total of 124 patients were referred as a control group to compare the peri-operative outcome, local recurrence rate and survival. These survivals were analysed using the Kaplan-Meier method with the log-rank test and propensity score analyses.RESULTSThe peri-operative outcome, including operative time, blood loss, duration of chest tube drainage and length of hospital stay, was not significantly different between groups. The number of dissected lymph nodes with segmentectomy was less than that with lobectomy. Morbidity and mortality were not significantly different between groups. Seven patients relapsed in each group and propensity score analysis in disease-free and overall survivals showed no differences between two groups in Stage IA. Subclass analyses revealed that disease-free and overall survivals in T1a and T1b were not significantly different between the two groups.CONCLUSIONSOur study demonstrated that thoracoscopic segmentectomy was feasible with regard to peri-operative and oncological outcomes for Stage IA NSCLC, especially T1a and carefully selected T1b descriptor.


Title : The EGFR T790M mutation in acquired resistance to an irreversible second-generation EGFR inhibitor.
Journal/Date : Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228822
Abstract : Molecular target therapies using the first-generation reversible epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib or erlotinib, have been shown to be effective for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who harbor activating mutations in EGFR. However, these patients eventually develop resistance to the reversible TKIs, and this has led to the development of second-generation irreversible EGFR inhibitors. Currently, the mechanism of acquired resistance to irreversible EGFR inhibitors is not clear. Using an in vitro cell culture system, we modeled the acquired resistance to first-line treatment with second-generation EGFR-TKIs, using an EGFR mutant NSCLC cell line. Here we report a mechanism of resistance involving T790M secondary mutation as well as a corresponding clinical case. The results of these findings suggest that inhibition of EGFR by currently available second-generation EGFR-TKIs may not be sufficient to physiologically prevent the emergence of cells that are still dependent on EGFR signaling. This finding bears important implications on the limitations of currently available second-generation EGFR TKIs.


Title : Targeted Near-Infrared Imaging of the Erythropoietin Receptor in Human Lung Cancer Xenografts.
Journal/Date : J Nucl Med. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228796
Abstract : The putative presence of the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) on human cancer cells has given rise to controversial discussion about the use of recombinant human erythropoietin (rhuEpo) for treatment of patients with chemotherapy-induced anemia. In vivo analysis of the EpoR status in tumors could help in elucidating the role of erythropoietin in cancer. Thus, the aim of this study was to develop a targeted EpoR probe for the investigation of EpoR expression in human lung cancer xenografts by fluorescence-mediated tomography.  METHODS:  Epo-Cy5.5 was generated by coupling Cy5.5 to rhuEpo. In vitro binding assays were performed using the EpoR-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines A549 (lower EpoR expression) and H838 (higher EpoR expression), the EpoR-negative cell line H2030, and EpoR/EGFP-overexpressing HeLa cells. In vivo specificity of Epo-Cy5.5 was confirmed by competition analyses using micro-CT/fluorescence-mediated tomography fusion imaging. Biodistribution was analyzed over 50 h after injection. Binding of Epo-Cy5.5 was validated on tumor cryosections.  RESULTS:  After intravenous injection, the probe was rapidly cleared from the circulation. An accumulation was observed in liver and kidneys, with a maximum at 7 h after injection followed by a decline, indicating renal excretion. Almost constant accumulation of Epo-Cy5.5 was found in bone marrow and tumors, indicating specific receptor binding. The probe allowed the discrimination between H838 with higher EpoR expression (89.54 +/- 15.91 nM at 25 h) and A549 tumors with lower EpoR expression (60.45 +/- 14.59 nM at 25 h, P < 0.05). Tumor accumulation of Epo-Cy5.5 could be significantly reduced by adding unlabeled rhuEpo (P < 0.05 at 4, 7, and 24 h). In vitro validation confirmed specific binding of Epo-Cy5.5 to the tumor cells, and this binding correlated with the EpoR expression level. Binding was also observed on endothelial cells. Vessel density and Epo-Cy5.5 binding on endothelial cells were comparable.  CONCLUSION:  Epo-Cy5.5 allows the longitudinal analysis of EpoR expression in tumors and thereby can investigate the influence of erythropoietin on EpoR expression, tumor growth, and angiogenesis.


Title : A FRT-flanked p53 mouse to generate primary tumors with Flp recombinase.
Journal/Date : Dis Model Mech. 2011 Dec 22.	 Pubmed Id: 22228755
Abstract : The site-specific recombinases Cre and Flp can mutate genes in a spatially and temporally restricted manner in mice. Conditional recombination of the tumor suppressor p53 using the Cre-loxP system has led to the development of multiple genetically engineered mouse models of human cancer. However, initiation of tumors with Cre recombinase limits the utilization of Cre to genetically modify other genes in stromal cells. To overcome this limitation, we inserted FRT sites flanking exons 2 through 6 of the endogenous p53 gene in mice to generate a p53(FRT) allele that can be deleted by Flp recombinase. We show that FlpO-mediated deletion of p53 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts impairs the p53-dependent response to genotoxic stress in vitro. In addition, using FSF-Kras(G12D/+); p53(FRT/FRT) mice, we demonstrate an adenovirus expressing FlpO recombinase can initiate primary lung cancers and sarcomas in mice. p53(FRT) mice will enable dual recombinase technology to study cancer biology because Cre is available to modify genes specifically in stromal cells to investigate their role in tumor development, progression, and response to therapy.


Title : Clarifying the spectrum of driver oncogene mutations in biomarker-verified squamous carcinoma of lung: lack of EGFR/KRAS and presence of PIK3CA/AKT1 mutations.
Journal/Date : Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228640
Abstract : PURPOSE:  There is persistent controversy as to whether EGFR/KRAS mutations occur in pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma (SQCC). We hypothesized that the reported variability may reflect difficulties in the pathologic distinction of true SQCC from adenosquamous carcinoma (AD-SQC) and poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma (ADC) due to incomplete sampling or morphologic overlap. The recent development of a robust immunohistochemical approach for distinguishing squamous vs glandular differentiation provides an opportunity to reassess EGFR/KRAS and other targetable kinase mutation frequencies in a pathologically homogeneous series of SQCC.  EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN:  Ninety-five resected SQCC, verified by immunohistochemistry as DeltaNp63+/TTF-1-, were tested for activating mutations in EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, NRAS, AKT1, ERBB2/HER2, and MAP2K1/MEK1. Additionally, all tissue samples from rare patients with the diagnosis of EGFR/KRAS-mutant "SQCC" encountered during 5 years of routine clinical genotyping were reassessed pathologically.RESULTS:  The screen of 95 biomarker-verified SQCC revealed no EGFR/KRAS (0%; 95% CI 0-3.8%), 4 PIK3CA (4%; 95% CI 1-10%) and 1 AKT1 (1%; 95% CI 0-5.7%) mutations. Detailed morphologic and immunohistochemical reevaluation of EGFR/KRAS-mutant "SQCC" identified during clinical genotyping (n=16) resulted in reclassification of 10 (63%) cases as AD-SQC and 5 (31%) cases as poorly-differentiated ADC morphologically mimicking SQCC (i.e. ADC with "squamoid" morphology). One (6%) case had no follow-up.CONCLUSIONS:  Our findings suggest that EGFR/KRAS mutations do not occur in pure pulmonary SQCC, and occasional detection of these mutations in samples diagnosed as "SQCC" is due to challenges with the diagnosis of AD-SQC and ADC, which can be largely resolved by comprehensive pathologic assessment incorporating immunohistochemical biomarkers.


Title : Phase II Trial of Temozolomide in Patients with Relapsed Sensitive or Refractory Small Cell Lung Cancer, with Assessment of Methyl-Guanine-DNA Methyltransferase as a Potential Biomarker.
Journal/Date : Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228633
Abstract : PURPOSE:  This phase II study was conducted to assess the efficacy of temozolomide in patients with relapsed small cell lung cancer (SCLC).EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN:  Patients with disease progression after one or two prior chemotherapy regimens received temozolomide at 75mg/m(2)/day for 21 days of a 28-day cycle. The primary endpoint was overall response rate (ORR; complete plus partial response), which was evaluated separately in sensitive and refractory cohorts. In available tissue, we assessed MGMT promoter methylation status by PCR and MGMT expression by immunohistochemistry.RESULTS:  Sixty-four patients were accrued: 48 patients in the sensitive cohort and 16 in the refractory group. One complete response (CR) and 10 partial responses (PR) were noted in sensitive patients, ORR 23% [95% CI, 12% to 37%]. Two PRs were seen in the refractory cohort, ORR 13% [95% CI, 2% to 38%]. As second- and third-line treatment, the ORR was 22% [95% CI, 9% to 40%] and 19% [95% CI, 7% to 36%], respectively. Among patients with target brain lesions, 38% had a CR or PR [95% CI, 14% to 68%]. Grade >/=3 thrombocytopenia and neutropenia were observed in 9 patients (14%). A greater number of cases with methylated MGMT had a response compared to those with unmethylated MGMT (38% vs. 7%), p = 0.08.CONCLUSIONS:  Temozolomide has activity in relapsed SCLC, particularly for brain metastases. Response to temozolomide may correlate with MGMT methylation in SCLC.


Title : Development and validation of a prediction index for hand-foot skin reaction in cancer patients receiving sorafenib.
Journal/Date : Ann Oncol. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228446
Abstract : BACKGROUND: This study describes a repeated measures prediction index to identify patients at high risk of >/= grade 2 hand-foot skin reaction (HFSR) before each week of sorafenib therapy. METHODS: Data from 451 patients who received a sorafenib (400 mg bid) as part of a clinical trial were reviewed (Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM et al. Sorafenib in advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2007; 356: 125-134). Generalized estimating equations were used to develop the final risk model. A risk-scoring algorithm (range 0-58) was then derived from the final model coefficients. External validation was then carried out on a new sample of 1145 patients who received sorafenib under an expanded access program. RESULTS: Pretreatment white blood cell count, female gender, good performance status, presence of lung and liver metastases and number of affected organs were predictors for >/= grade 2 HFSR. A nonlinear association between HFSR risk and treatment duration was also identified where risk was maximized at week 5 followed by a gradual decline. Before each week of therapy, patients with risk scores >40 would be considered at high risk for developing >/= grade 2 HFSR. CONCLUSIONS: The application and planned continued refinement of this prediction tool will be an important source of patient-specific risk information for the development of moderate to severe HFSR.


Title : Usefulness of F-18 FDG PET/CT as One-Stop-Shop Imaging Modality for Diagnosis of Occult Primary and Estimation of Disease Burden in Patients With Intraocular Masses.
Journal/Date : Clin Nucl Med. 2012 Feb;37(2):200-3.	 Pubmed Id: 22228354
Abstract : Metastases are the most common intraocular malignancy. Determination of the primary site and entire burden of disease as a part of initial staging is important in choosing the most appropriate management strategy. F-18 FDG PET/CT can demonstrate primary neoplasms and the whole-body total burden of disease. We present 2 cases of intraocular metastases from lung carcinoma where F-18 FDG PET/CT was useful as one-stop-shop imaging modality in detection of the primary and in assessment of total disease burden.


Title : Radiation-Induced Myositis Mimicking Chest Wall Tumor Invasion in Two Patients With Lung Cancer: A PET/CT Study.
Journal/Date : Clin Nucl Med. 2012 Feb;37(2):168-9.	 Pubmed Id: 22228342
Abstract : Two patients with lung cancer who had undergone stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) exhibited increased F-18 FDG uptake in the chest wall after 6 months and 18 months, respectively, after SBRT. The prescribed dose of 50 Gy to the planning target volume was delivered on 4 consecutive days in each patient. It is important for nuclear medicine physicians to be familiar with F-18 FDG PET/CT findings ascribed to radiation-induced myositis in lung cancer patients treated with SBRT so that an appropriate differential diagnosis can be established.


Title : Prostate Cancer Screening in the Randomized Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial: Mortality Results after 13 Years of Follow-up.
Journal/Date : J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22228146
Abstract : BackgroundThe prostate component of the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial was undertaken to determine whether there is a reduction in prostate cancer mortality from screening using serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing and digital rectal examination (DRE). Mortality after 7-10 years of follow-up has been reported previously. We report extended follow-up to 13 years after the trial.MethodsA total of 76 685 men, aged 55-74 years, were enrolled at 10 screening centers between November 1993 and July 2001 and randomly assigned to the intervention (organized screening of annual PSA testing for 6 years and annual DRE for 4 years; 38 340 men) and control (usual care, which sometimes included opportunistic screening; 38 345 men) arms. Screening was completed in October 2006. All incident prostate cancers and deaths from prostate cancer through 13 years of follow-up or through December 31, 2009, were ascertained. Relative risks (RRs) were estimated as the ratio of observed rates in the intervention and control arms, and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated assuming a Poisson distribution for the number of events. Poisson regression modeling was used to examine the interactions with respect to prostate cancer mortality between trial arm and age, comorbidity status, and pretrial PSA testing. All statistical tests were two-sided.ResultsApproximately 92% of the study participants were followed to 10 years and 57% to 13 years. At 13 years, 4250 participants had been diagnosed with prostate cancer in the intervention arm compared with 3815 in the control arm. Cumulative incidence rates for prostate cancer in the intervention and control arms were 108.4 and 97.1 per 10 000 person-years, respectively, resulting in a relative increase of 12% in the intervention arm (RR = 1.12, 95% CI = 1.07 to 1.17). After 13 years of follow-up, the cumulative mortality rates from prostate cancer in the intervention and control arms were 3.7 and 3.4 deaths per 10 000 person-years, respectively, resulting in a non-statistically significant difference between the two arms (RR = 1.09, 95% CI = 0.87 to 1.36). No statistically significant interactions with respect to prostate cancer mortality were observed between trial arm and age (P(interaction) = .81), pretrial PSA testing (P(interaction) = .52), and comorbidity (P(interaction) = .68).ConclusionsAfter 13 years of follow-up, there was no evidence of a mortality benefit for organized annual screening in the PLCO trial compared with opportunistic screening, which forms part of usual care, and there was no apparent interaction with age, baseline comorbidity, or pretrial PSA testing.


Title : The p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 polymorphism is associated with risk of lung cancer in the Han nationality of North China.
Journal/Date : Mol Carcinog. 2012 Jan 6. doi: 10.1002/mc.21869.	 Pubmed Id: 22228141
Abstract : p73, a structural and functional homolog of p53, plays an important role in tumor carcinogenesis. Previous studies have suggested that the association between the p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 polymorphism and the risk of lung cancer, but the results have not been entirely consistent. We examined whether the p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 polymorphism was related to the risk of developing lung cancer in a Chinese population. The p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 polymorphism was genotyped in 293 lung cancer patients and 380 cancer-free controls of Han nationality in North China using PCR-RFLP. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to calculate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). We observed that compared with the GC/GC genotype, the genotypes containing AT allele (GC/AT + AT/AT genotypes) were associated with significantly increased susceptibility to lung cancer (OR, 1.48; 95% CI, 1.08-2.02; P = 0.014). In addition, compared with the GC/GC genotype, the GC/AT genotype was also significantly associated with increased susceptibility to lung cancer (OR, 1.46; 95% CI, 1.06-2.02; P = 0.046). Our findings suggest that the p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 polymorphism contributes to the risk of developing lung cancer in Chinese population. (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.


Title : Management of Lung Metastases from Colorectal Cancer: Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery versus Thoracotomy-A Case-Matched Study.
Journal/Date : Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012 Jan 7.	 Pubmed Id: 22228090
Abstract : Objectives The benefits of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) for performing pulmonary metastasectomy are considered controversial. This case-matched study aimed to compare long-term outcomes after surgical resection of pulmonary metastases from colorectal cancer using different approaches (VATS vs. thoracotomy). Methods Between 1997 and 2008, 143 patients with colorectal cancer who had received their first pulmonary metastasectomy were selected. Fifty-three patients underwent a surgical procedure that utilized a thoracotomy approach (Group 1), and 90 patients underwent a surgical procedure that used a VATS-based approach (Group 2). After being matched for tumor number, diameter (measured by computed tomography), and surgical procedure (wedge resection or lobectomy), 35 pairs of patients were finally enrolled. Study endpoints included tumor recurrence and survival.Results There was no hospital mortality in both groups. Within the mean follow-up period of 50 months, 47.1% patients developed a recurrence (52% at the pulmonary level and 48% at systemic level), and 52.9% of the patients were alive at the time of analysis. There was no difference between Groups 1 and 2 in terms of overall recurrences (54 vs. 40%, p = 0.23), all pulmonary recurrences (25.7 vs. 22.9%, p = 0.78), and same side lung recurrences (14.3 vs. 20%, p = 0.75). The 5-year overall survival (OS) after lung resection was 43 and 51% in Groups 1 and 2, respectively (p = 0.21). Conclusions Our case-matched study showed that survival outcome of pulmonary metastasectomy using VATS is not inferior to that of open thoracotomy in selected cases.


Title : Induction of DNA damage by deguelin is mediated through reducing DNA       repair genes in human non-small cell lung cancer NCI-H460 cells.
Journal/Date : Oncol Rep. 2012 Jan 4. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1622.	 Pubmed Id: 22227970
Abstract : It has been shown that deguelin, one of the compounds of rotenoids from          flavonoid family, induced cytotoxic effects through induction of cell cycle arrest             and apoptosis in many types of human cancer cell lines, but deguelin-affected             DNA damage and repair gene expression (mRNA) are not clarified yet. We investigated             the effects of deguelin on DNA damage and associated gene expression in human            lung cancer NCI-H460 cells in vitro. DNA damage was assayed by using the comet             assay and DNA gel electrophoresis and the results indicated that NCI-H460 cells             treated with 0, 50, 250 and 500 nM deguelin led to a longer DNA migration smear             based on the single cell electrophoresis and DNA fragmentation occurred based          on the examination of DNA gel electrophoresis. DNA damage and repair gene expression             (mRNA) were evaluated by using real-time PCR assay and the results indicated that             50 and 250 nM deguelin for a 24-h exposure in NCI-H460 cells, decreased the gene        levels of breast cancer 1, early onset (BRCA1), DNA-dependent serine/threonine             protein kinase (DNA-PK), O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), p53, ataxia             telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR)             mRNA expressions. Collectively, the present study showed that deguelin caused           DNA damage and inhibited DNA damage and repair gene expressions, which might be             due to deguelin-inhibited cell growth in vitro.


Title : Systemic lupus and malignancies.
Journal/Date : Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2012 Jan 5.	 Pubmed Id: 22227880
Abstract : PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Individuals with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have an increased susceptibility to certain types of cancer. Given concerns focused on this issue, we present a review of this important topic. RECENT FINDINGS: In non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), a several-fold increased risk is seen in SLE versus the general population. It has long been suspected that immunosuppressive drugs play a role in this risk, but there may be other important driving factors as well. Lupus disease activity may itself heighten the risk of lymphoma in diseases like SLE. Lung cancer risk also is increased in SLE; smoking appears to drive this risk. Additionally, cervical dysplasia risk is increased in SLE, particularly with immunosuppressive drug exposure. An altered clearance of cancer-related viral agents in SLE (due to the disease and/or immunosuppression) may contribute to this risk and may also drive the risk for other cancers (such as vulvovaginal and hepatic carcinomas) in SLE. On the positive side, one new and significant finding is that SLE patients seem to have a decreased risk of certain nonhematologic cancers (breast, ovarian, endometrial, and prostate). SUMMARY: Though much has been learnt so far regarding the risk in SLE, much yet remains unknown.


Title : Synergistic activity of the Hsp90 inhibitor ganetespib with taxanes in non-small cell lung cancer models.
Journal/Date : Invest New Drugs. 2012 Jan 10.	 Pubmed Id: 22227828
Abstract : Systemic chemotherapy using two-drug platinum-based regimens for the treatment of advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has largely reached a plateau of effectiveness. Accordingly, efforts to improve survival and quality of life outcomes have more recently focused on the use of molecularly targeted agents, either alone or in combination with standard of care therapies such as taxanes. The molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) represents an attractive candidate for therapeutic intervention, as its inhibition results in the simultaneous blockade of multiple oncogenic signaling cascades. Ganetespib is a non-ansamycin inhibitor of Hsp90 currently under clinical evaluation in a number of human malignancies, including NSCLC. Here we show that ganetespib potentiates the cytotoxic activity of the taxanes paclitaxel and docetaxel in NSCLC models. The combination of ganetespib with paclitaxel, docetaxel or another microtubule-targeted agent vincristine resulted in synergistic antiproliferative effects in the H1975 cell line in vitro. These benefits translated to improved efficacy in H1975 xenografts in vivo, with significantly enhanced tumor growth inhibition observed in combination with paclitaxel and tumor regressions seen with docetaxel. Notably, concurrent exposure to ganetespib and docetaxel improved antitumor activity in 5 of 6 NSCLC xenograft models examined. Our data suggest that the improved therapeutic indices are likely to be mechanistically multifactorial, including loss of pro-survival signaling and direct cell cycle effects resulting from Hsp90 modulation by ganetespib. Taken together, these findings provide preclinical evidence for the use of this combination to treat patients with advanced NSCLC.


Title : Smac: its role in apoptosis induction and use in lung cancer diagnosis and treatment.
Journal/Date : Cancer Lett. 2012 Jan 3.	 Pubmed Id: 22227574
Abstract : Apoptosis is a conserved and regulated cell suicide process, the malfunction of which is closely linked with carcinogenesis. Caspases control the induction of apoptosis through an enzymatic cascade that can be activated by both the mitochondrial and death receptor pathways. Smac is a mitochondrial protein that interacts with Inhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins (IAPs) and, upon apoptotic stimuli, is released into the cytoplasm to inhibit the capase-binding activity of IAPs. Smac plays key roles in both the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, especially lung cancer. Our review will focus on the roles of Smac in lung carcinogenesis and cancer progression and its relevance in lung cancer treatment.


Title : Discovery of novel selective inhibitors for EGFR-T790M/L858R.
Journal/Date : Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Dec 17.	 Pubmed Id: 22227214
Abstract : Through a receptor-based and ligand-based combined virtual screening protocol, 21 novel compounds covering 15 scaffolds were identified as novel inhibitors for EGFR-T790M/L858R, among which, 12 of them were identified as selective inhibitors for EGFR-T790M/L858R to wild-type EGFR, and 5 of them exhibited 'dual-effective' to wild-type and mutant EGFR. Meanwhile, their antiproliferative effects toward EGFR high-expressing human lung cancer cell (A549), epidermoid carcinoma cell (A431), and the mutant EGFR-dependent cell (NCI-H1975) were also evaluated.


Title : Change in employment status of 5-year cancer survivors.
Journal/Date : Eur J Public Health. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22227027
Abstract : AIMS: To follow the employment status of 5-year cancer survivors for 5 years after diagnosis with their first lifetime invasive cancer and to identify socio-demographic, work-related and cancer-related predictors of employment status after 5 years.  METHODS:  This prospective registry study concerned all 3278 people in Norway (18-61 years old) diagnosed with their first lifetime invasive cancer in 1999 and alive in 2004 and a cancer-free control group (n = 6368) matched by sex, age, educational level and employment status in 1998.  RESULTS:  The employment rate among male cancer survivors declined steadily every year, from 94% the year before diagnosis (1998) to 77% 5 years after diagnosis (2004). This change did not differ significantly from that of male controls. The employment rate of female survivors also declined steadily, from 87% (1998) to 69% (2004). This decline was greater than that among female controls, and in 2004 survivors had a significantly lower employment rate. For both men and women, the significant pre-diagnosis predictors of being employed in 2004 concerned higher socio-economic position. For both sexes, lung cancer survivors had the highest decline in employment rate, and male skin cancer survivors had a lower decline in employment rate than controls. Socio-demographic and work-related factors explained more of the variance in employment status than did cancer diagnosis.  CONCLUSION:  The employment rate among 5-year cancer survivors did not change significantly except for female survivors. Low socio-economic position is a risk factor for decline in employment rate and should be focused on to prevent cancer-related inequity.


Title : Adjuvant immunotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer.
Journal/Date : Cancer Treat Rev. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22226940
Abstract : Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the biggest cancer killer in the United States and worldwide. In 2011, there are estimated to be 221,130 new cases of lung cancer in the United States. Over a million people will die of lung cancer worldwide this year alone. When possible, surgery to remove the tumor is the best treatment strategy for patients with NSCLC. However, even with adjuvant (postoperative) chemotherapy and radiation, more than 40% of patients will develop recurrences locally or systemically and ultimately succumb to their disease. Thus, there is an urgent need for developing superior approaches to treat patients who undergo surgery for NSCLC to eliminate residual disease that is likely responsible for these recurrences. Our group and others have been interested in using immunotherapy to augment the efficacy of current treatment strategies. Immunotherapy is very effective against minimal disease burden and small deposits of tumor cells that are accessible by the circulating immune cells. Therefore, this strategy may be ideally suited as an adjunct to surgery to seek and destroy microscopic tumor deposits that remain after surgery. This review describes the mechanistic underpinnings of immunotherapy and how it is currently being used to target residual disease and prevent postoperative recurrences after pulmonary resection in NSCLC.


Title : History of tuberculosis as an independent prognostic factor for lung cancer survival.
Journal/Date : Lung Cancer. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22226628
Abstract : INTRODUCTION: It is well known that pulmonary tuberculosis is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer. We investigated whether a history of pulmonary tuberculosis is an independent risk factor for lung cancer survival in Caucasian patients. METHODS: The data of the prospective population-based cohort of The Rotterdam Study were used. During a mean follow-up time of 18 years, there were 214 incident cases of pathology-proven lung cancer in a source population of 7983 study participants. History of tuberculosis was assessed at baseline by interviewers using standardized questionnaires. Associations of lung cancer survival with the occurrence of pulmonary tuberculosis were assessed using Cox's proportional hazard regression analysis adjusted for age, gender, pack-years, educational level and tumor stage. RESULTS: A history of tuberculosis was reported in 13 of the 214 subjects with lung cancer. The survival of patients with lung cancer was significantly shorter in subjects with a history of pulmonary tuberculosis (HR=2.36, CI95%: 1.1-4.9), than in subjects without a history of pulmonary tuberculosis with a mean difference of 311 days. CONCLUSION: The presence of a history of pulmonary tuberculosis may be an important prognostic factor in the survival of lung cancer.


Title : Erlotinib or best supportive care for third-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: A real-world cost-effectiveness analysis.
Journal/Date : Lung Cancer. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22226627
Abstract : Erlotinib has been approved as a third-line treatment for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in British Columbia (BC). A cost-effectiveness analysis was conducted to compare costs and effectiveness in patients who received third-line erlotinib to those in a historical patient cohort that would have been eligible had erlotinib been available. METHODS: In a population of patients who have been treated with drugs for advanced NSCLC, overall survival (OS), progression-to-death survival (PTD) and probability of survival one year after end of second-line (1YS) were determined using a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. Costs were collected retrospectively from the perspective of the BC health care system. RESULTS: Incremental mean OS was 90 days (0.25 LYG), and incremental mean cost was $11,102 (CDN 2009), resulting in a mean ICER of $36,838/LYG. Univariate sensitivity analysis yielded ICERs ranging from $21,300 to $51,700/LYG. CONCLUSION: Our analysis suggests that erlotinib may be an effective and cost-effective third-line treatment for advanced NSCLC compared to best supportive care.


Title : A meta-analysis of paclitaxel-based chemotherapies administered once every week compared with once every 3 weeks first-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.
Journal/Date : Lung Cancer. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22226626
Abstract : OBJECTIVE: The published data on the curative effects of comparing the once weekly paclitaxel-based chemotherapies (W-paclitaxel) with the standard every 3 weeks paclitaxel-based chemotherapies (S-paclitaxel) in the first-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were still controversial. To derive a more precise estimation of the two regimens, a meta-analysis was performed. METHODS: Medical databases and conference proceedings were searched for randomized controlled trials which compared W-paclitaxel with S-paclitaxel in patients with first-line treatment of advanced NSCLC. The following keywords were used: "paclitaxel", "weekly schedule" and "non-small cell lung cancer". Reference lists of original articles and review articles were also examined. The published languages and years were not limited. Endpoints were overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), overall response rate (ORR) and adverse events. Statistical tests for heterogeneity were one-sided; statistical tests for effect estimates were two-sided. RESULTS: Five eligible trials involved 940 patients were identified. They were all published as full-text articles. The intention to treatment (ITT) analysis demonstrated that the ORR of W-paclitaxel regimens patients was 30.89% (143/463), whereas the ORR of S-paclitaxel regimens patients was 27.09% (123/454). The overall pooled relative ratio (RR) for ORR was 1.24 (95% confidence intervals (CI)=0.93-1.66; P=0.14) when W-paclitaxel regimens patients were compared with S-paclitaxel regimens patients. Although the patients with W-paclitaxel regimens had an similar OS and PFS in comparison with S-paclitaxel regimens (median OS was 9.8 versus 10.7 months; hazard ratio (HR)=1.00; 95%CI=0.86-1.17; P=0.99; median PFS was 5.2 versus 4.7 months; HR=0.90; 95%CI=0.79-1.03; P=0.13, respectively), the W-paclitaxel regimens led to significantly less frequent adverse events of hematological toxicities and nonhematological toxicities. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the W-paclitaxel is not superior than S-paclitaxel regimens. The paclitaxel-based chemotherapies given by every 3 weeks are still standard regimens. For patients, especially for the elder or the people with poor conditions who cannot tolerate the standard regimen, the weekly schedule can be considered.


Title : The elderly patient with surgically resected non-small cell lung cancer - A distinct situation?
Journal/Date : Exp Gerontol. 2011 Dec 29.	 Pubmed Id: 22226625
Abstract : The worldwide population shift towards older ages will inevitably lead to more elderly patients being diagnosed with cancer. Lung cancer is the number one cause for cancer mortality and surgical resection is the treatment of choice whenever possible. This study investigates whether elderly patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are characterized by distinct clinical and pathologic features and different clinical course after resection. Special emphasis is placed on disease recurrence, which is an important, but rarely described parameter for biological tumor behavior. Sex, stage, histology, differentiation grade, smoking status, performance status, hemoglobin, C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, Ki-67 index, recurrent disease and overall survival were analyzed in 383 surgically resected NSCLC patients. Calculations were performed comparing patients <70 to >70years. A postoperative follow-up period of 15years enabled detailed correlations. Rate of disease recurrence and disease-free survival did not differ between any age groups and was not influenced by clinico-pathologic parameters. Elderly patients with a Ki-67 index of >3% were associated with significantly decreased overall survival time when compared to younger patients (36.3 and 47.3months respectively, p=0.029). The biological behavior of NSCLC as reflected by characteristics of disease recurrence is similar for surgically resected patients among different age groups and does not warrant specific recommendations for the elderly surgical patient. The Ki-67 index offers prognostic information for overall survival in the elderly.


Title : Pulmonary metastases from colorectal cancer: imaging findings and growth rates at follow-up CT.
Journal/Date : Clin Imaging. 2012 Jan;36(1):14-8.	 Pubmed Id: 22226437
Abstract : The objective of the study was to evaluate the computed tomographic (CT) features and growth rates of pulmonary metastases from colorectal cancer (CRC) on serial CT scans. The study included 17 patients (28 pulmonary metastases) who underwent metastasectomy from CRC. The characteristic CT features include well-defined round or oval nodules in the peripheral or subpleural/fissural lung with frequent feeding vessel sign. The mean tumor volume doubling time was calculated as 160 days. With these growth rates, short-term follow-up (i.e., 5-6 months) would be helpful.


Title : Polyarthritis as a prewarning sign of occult lung cancer.
Journal/Date : Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2012 Jan;28(1):54-6. Epub 2011 Dec 11.	 Pubmed Id: 22226062
Abstract : Cancer polyarthritis is an uncommon, paraneoplastic manifestation of some solid and hematological malignancies. Herein, we report the case of a 55-year-old woman who recently experienced polyarthritis for 2 months. On admission, the patient developed cough, expectoration, and fever. According to the clinical manifestations and the findings in radiological examinations and sputum cultures, pneumonia was considered. No evidence of lung cancer was noted by repeated computed tomography scan of lung, single bronchoscopy, or computed tomography-guided lung biopsy. Ultimately, the second bronchoscopy with biopsy was carried out, and lung adenocarcinoma was confirmed by pathological examination. Symptoms of polyarthritis starting 2 months before the symptoms of her lung cancer in the present case leads us to believe that polyarthritis may be a manifestation of paraneoplastic syndrome. Arthritis resolved after anticancer therapy. Our report indicates that polyarthritis of unknown cause may be suspected as a manifestation of malignancies.


Title : Hyperinsulinemia enhances c-Myc-mediated mammary tumor development and advances metastatic progression to the lung in a mouse model of Type 2 Diabetes.
Journal/Date : Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 7;14(1):R8.	 Pubmed Id: 22226054
Abstract : ABSTRACT:  INTRODUCTION: Hyperinsulinemia, which is common in early type 2 diabetes (T2D) as a result of the chronically insulin-resistant state, has now been identified as a specific factor which can worsen breast cancer prognosis. In breast cancer, a high rate of mortality persists due to the emergence of pulmonary metastases.   METHODS: Using a hyperinsulinemic mouse model (MKR+/+) and the metastatic, c-Myc-transformed mammary carcinoma cell line Mvt1, we investigated how high systemic insulin levels would affect the progression of orthotopically inoculated primary mammary tumors to lung metastases.  RESULTS: We found that orthotopically injected Mvt1 cells gave rise to larger mammary tumors and to a significantly higher mean number of pulmonary macrometastases in hyperinsulinemic mice over a period of six weeks (hyperinsulinemic, 19.4 +/- 2.7 vs. control, 4.0 +/- 1.3). When Mvt1-mediated mammary tumors were allowed to develop and metastasize for approximately two weeks and were then surgically removed, hyperinsulinemic mice demonstrated a significantly higher number of lung metastases after a four week period (hyperinsulinemic, 25.1 +/- 4.6 vs. control, 7.4 +/- 0.42). Similarly, when Mvt1 cells were injected intravenously, hyperinsulinemic mice demonstrated a significantly higher metastatic burden in the lung than controls after a three week period (hyperinsulinemic, 6.0 +/- 1.63 vs. control, 1.5 +/- 0.68). Analysis of Mvt1 cells both in vitro and in vivo revealed a significant upregulation of the transcription factor c-Myc under hyperinsulinemic conditions, suggesting that hyperinsulinemia may promote c-Myc signaling in breast cancer. Furthermore, insulin-lowering therapy using the beta-adrenergic receptor agonist CL-316243 reduced metastatic burden in hyperinsulinemic mice to control levels.  CONCLUSIONS: Hyperinsulinemia in a mouse model promotes breast cancer metastasis to lung. Therapies to reduce insulin levels in hyperinsulinemic patients suffering from breast cancer could lessen the likelihood of metastatic progression.


Title : Hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha promotes primary tumor growth and tumor-initiating cell activity in breast cancer.
Journal/Date : Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 7;14(1):R6.	 Pubmed Id: 22225988
Abstract : ABSTRACT:  INTRODUCTION: Over-expression of the oxygen-responsive transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha correlates with poor prognosis in breast cancer patients. The MMTV-PyMT (polyoma virus middle T) mouse is a widely utilized pre-clinical mouse model that resembles luminal breast cancer and is highly metastatic. Prior studies in the PyMT model demonstrated that HIF-1 is essential to promote carcinoma onset and lung metastasis, although no differences in primary tumor endpoint size were observed. Using a refined model system, we investigated whether HIF-1 is directly implicated in regulation of tumor-initiating cells (TICs) in breast cancer. METHODS: Mammary tumor epithelial cells (MTECs) were created from MMTV-PyMT mice harboring conditional alleles of Hif1a, followed by transduction ex vivo with either denovirusbeta-galactosidase or Cre to generate wild type (WT) and HIF-1 null (KO) cells, respectively. The impact of HIF-1 deletion on tumor-initiating potential was investigated using tumorsphere assays, limiting dilution transplantation and gene expression analysis. RESULTS: Efficient deletion of HIF-1alpha reduced primary tumor growth and suppressed lung metastases, prolonging survival. Loss of HIF-1 led to reduced expression of markers of the basal lineage (K5/K14) in cells and tumors and of multiple genes involved in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition. HIF-1alpha also enhanced tumorsphere formation at normoxia and hypoxia. Decreased expression of several genes in the Notch pathway, Vegf and Prominin-1 (CD133) were observed in response to HIF deletion. Immunohistochemistry confirmed that CD133 expression was reduced in KO cells and in tumorspheres. Tumorsphere formation was enhanced in CD133hi versus CD133neg cells sorted from PyMT tumors. Limiting dilution transplantation of WT and KO tumor cells into immunocompetent recipients revealed >30-fold enrichment of TICs in WT cells. CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that HIF-1alpha plays a key role in promoting primary mammary tumor growth and metastasis, in part through regulation of TICs. HIF-1 regulates expression of several members of the Notch pathway, CD133 and markers of the basal lineage in mammary tumors. Our results suggest that CD133, which has not been profiled extensively in breast cancer, may be a useful marker of TICs in the PyMT model. These data reveal for the first time that HIF-1 directly regulates breast TIC activity in vivo.


Title : Design and synthesis of a highly selective, orally active and potent anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitor (CH5424802).
Journal/Date : Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Dec 22.	 Pubmed Id: 22225917
Abstract : Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) receptor tyrosine kinase is considered an attractive therapeutic target for human cancers, especially non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our previous study revealed that 8,9-side-chains of 6,6-dimethyl-11-oxo-6,11-dihydro-5H-benzo[b]carbazole scaffold crucially affected kinase selectivity, cellular activity, and metabolic stability. In this work, we optimized the side-chains and identified highly selective, orally active and potent ALK inhibitor CH5424802 (18a) as the clinical candidate.


Title : Are elastic stain and specialty sign out necessary to evaluate pleural invasion in lung cancers?
Journal/Date : Ann Diagn Pathol. 2012 Jan 4.	 Pubmed Id: 22225904
Abstract : The seventh edition of American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system assigns lung cancers with visceral pleural invasion in the tumor size of 3 cm or less than 3 cm as T2 and without pleural invasion as T1. However, it may be difficult to distinguish with certainty between PL0 (no pleural invasion) and PL1 (extends through the elastic layer) on routine hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain. In this study, 25 cases of peripherally located lung adenocarcinoma were retrieved from the surgical pathology archives at the Asan Medical Center from May through June 2009. One representative H&E-stained slide was selected from each case and circulated to 31 pathology trainees and board-certified pathologists at Asan Medical Center who evaluated presence or absence of pleural invasion on H&E-stained slides. Elastic stain was used to determine the final status of pleural invasion for each case. The concordance rate of all pathologists with elastic stain results was, overall, 60.5%. The concordance rate of 2 lung specialists was 64%, better than the remaining faculty (54.7%). Fellows' and residents' evaluations were slightly more concordant than those of faculty responses (faculty overall, 56.4%; fellows, 62%; residents, 63.6%), but this difference was not statistically significant (P = .228). Our results confirm that pleural invasion status is difficult to discern with certainty on H&E-stained sections alone. Therefore, we recommend the routine use of elastic stain in evaluation of pleural invasion in all peripherally located lung cancers. Furthermore, our study indicates that subspecialty sign out may be preferable in evaluation of pleural invasion status.


Title : Ionizing radiation regulates the expression of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in epithelial cancer cells Modulation of cellular signals regulating cell cycle and survival.
Journal/Date : Radiother Oncol. 2012 Jan 5.	 Pubmed Id: 22225791
Abstract : PURPOSE: To analyze the (i) expression of AMPK in a variety of epithelial cancer cells, (ii) regulation of AMPK subunit expression by ionizing radiation (IR) and (iii) impact of AMPK on signaling pathways regulating cell cycle and survival. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Human lung, prostate, and breast normal and cancer cells were treated with 0 or 8Gy IR and mRNA and protein levels of AMPK were evaluated by RT-PCR and immunoblotting 24 or 48h later. Untreated and radiated wild type (WT) and AMPKalpha(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were analyzed by immunoblotting using total- and phosphorylation-specific antibodies. Histone H2Ax was examined by fluorescence microscopy. The cell cycle and survival of WT and AMPKalpha(-/-) MEFs was also evaluated following 8 by IR. RESULTS: AMPK subunits were found widely expressed in normal and cancer epithelial cells. IR increased subunit protein levels and stimulated gene transcription in cancer cells. AMPKalpha(-/-)-MEFs showed enhanced basal total levels of ATM and phosphorylation of its substrates histone H2Ax, but inhibited response of these markers and of checkpoint kinase Chk2 phosphorylation to IR. AMPKalpha(-/-)-MEFs showed increased basal levels of p53 and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21(cip1), but lack of response of both genes to IR. These cells had increased basal levels and activation of the Akt-mTOR-p70(S6K)/4-EBP1 signalling pathway. IR increased Akt, p70(S6K) and 4-EBP1 phosphorylation in WT-MEFs, but this was reduced in AMPKalpha(-/-)-MEFs. AMPKalpha(-/-)-MEFs failed to arrest at the G2-M checkpoint after IR and showed a trend for radio-resistance in proliferation assays. CONCLUSIONS: AMPK is widely expressed in human normal and cancer epithelial cells and its gene transcription, protein levels, and enzymatic activity is stimulated by IR. Work with AMPKalpha knockout cells suggests that AMPK (i) may mediate a suppressive regulation on basal expression and activity of ATM and its downstream effector pathways Chk2/p53-p21(cip1) and Akt-mTOR, (ii) facilitates the normal response of these pathways to IR and, (iii) mediates the IR-induced G2-M checkpoint.


Title : Glycine Decarboxylase Activity Drives Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Tumor-Initiating Cells and Tumorigenesis.
Journal/Date : Cell. 2012 Jan 4.	 Pubmed Id: 22225612
Abstract : Identification of the factors critical to the tumor-initiating cell (TIC) state may open new avenues in cancer therapy. Here we show that the metabolic enzyme glycine decarboxylase (GLDC) is critical for TICs in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). TICs from primary NSCLC tumors express high levels of the oncogenic stem cell factor LIN28B and GLDC, which are both required for TIC growth and tumorigenesis. Overexpression of GLDC and other glycine/serine enzymes, but not catalytically inactive GLDC, promotes cellular transformation and tumorigenesis. We found that GLDC induces dramatic changes in glycolysis and glycine/serine metabolism, leading to changes in pyrimidine metabolism to regulate cancer cell proliferation. In the clinic, aberrant activation of GLDC correlates with poorer survival in lung cancer patients, and aberrant GLDC expression is observed in multiple cancer types. This link between glycine metabolism and tumorigenesis may provide novel targets for advancing anticancer therapy.


Title : Vertebral compression fracture risk after stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastases.
Journal/Date : J Neurosurg Spine. 2012 Jan 6.	 Pubmed Id: 22225488
Abstract : Object   The aim of this study was to identify potential risk factors for and determine the rate of vertebral compression fracture (VCF) after intensity-modulated, near-simultaneous, CT image-guided stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for spinal metastases.      Methods   The study group consisted of 123 vertebral bodies (VBs) in 93 patients enrolled in prospective protocols for metastatic disease. Data from these patients were retrospectively analyzed. Stereotactic body radiotherapy consisted of 1, 3, or 5 fractions for overall median doses of 18, 27, and 30 Gy, respectively. Magnetic resonance imaging studies, obtained at baseline and at each follow-up, were evaluated for VCFs, tumor involvement, and radiographic progression. Self-reported average pain levels were scored based on the 11-point (0-10) Brief Pain Inventory both at baseline and at follow-up. Obesity was defined as a body mass index >/= 30.      Results The median imaging follow-up was 14.9 months (range 1-71 months). Twenty-five new or progressing fractures (20%) were identified, and the median time to progression was 3 months after SBRT. The most common histologies included renal cancer (36 VBs, 10 fractures, 10 tumor progressions), breast cancer (20 VBs, 0 fractures, 5 tumor progressions), thyroid cancer (14 VBs, 1 fracture, 2 tumor progressions), non-small cell lung cancer (13 VBs, 3 fractures, 3 tumor progressions), and sarcoma (9 VBs, 2 fractures, 2 tumor progressions). Fifteen VBs were treated with kyphoplasty or vertebroplasty after SBRT, with 5 procedures done for preexisting VCFs. Tumor progression was noted in 32 locations (26%) with 5 months' median time to progression. At the time of noted fracture progression there was a trend toward higher average pain scores but no significant change in the median value. Univariate logistic regression showed that an age > 55 years (HR 6.05, 95% CI 2.1-17.47), a preexisting fracture (HR 5.05, 95% CI 1.94-13.16), baseline pain and narcotic use before SBRT (pain: HR 1.31, 95% CI 1.06-1.62; narcotic: HR 2.98, 95% CI 1.17-7.56) and after SBRT (pain: HR 1.34, 95% CI 1.06-1.70; narcotic: HR 3.63, 95% CI 1.41-9.29) were statistically significant predictors of fracture progression. On multivariate analysis an age > 55 years (HR 10.66, 95% CI 2.81-40.36), a preexisting fracture (HR 9.17, 95% CI 2.31-36.43), and baseline pain (HR 1.41, 95% CI 1.05-1.9) were found to be significant risks, whereas obesity (HR 0.02, 95% CI 0-0.2) was protective.      Conclusions   Stereotactic body radiotherapy is associated with a significant risk (20%) of VCF. Risk factors for VCF include an age > 55 years, a preexisting fracture, and baseline pain. These risk factors may aid in the selection of which spinal SBRT patients should be considered for prophylactic vertebral stabilization or augmentation procedures. Clinical trial registration no.: NCT00508443.


Title : In aqua vivo EPID dosimetry.
Journal/Date : Med Phys. 2012 Jan;39(1):367.	 Pubmed Id: 22225306
Abstract : Purpose: At the Netherlands Cancer Institute--Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital in vivo dosimetry using an electronic portal imaging device (EPID) has been implemented for almost all high-energy photon treatments of cancer with curative intent. Lung cancer treatments were initially excluded, because the original back-projection dose-reconstruction algorithm uses water-based scatter-correction kernels and therefore does not account for tissue inhomogeneities accurately. The aim of this study was to test a new method, in aqua vivo EPID dosimetry, for fast dose verification of lung cancer irradiations during actual patient treatment.Methods: The key feature of our method is the dose reconstruction in the patient from EPID images, obtained during the actual treatment, whereby the images have been converted to a situation as if the patient consisted entirely of water; hence, the method is termed in aqua vivo. This is done by multiplying the measured in vivo EPID image with the ratio of two digitally reconstructed transmission images for the unit-density and inhomogeneous tissue situation. For dose verification, a comparison is made with the calculated dose distribution with the inhomogeneity correction switched off. IMRT treatment verification is performed for each beam in 2D using a 2D gamma evaluation, while for the verification of volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) treatments in 3D a 3D gamma evaluation is applied using the same parameters (3%, 3 mm). The method was tested using two inhomogeneous phantoms simulating a tumor in lung and measuring its sensitivity for patient positioning errors. Subsequently five IMRT and five VMAT clinical lung cancer treatments were investigated, using both the conventional back-projection algorithm and the in aqua vivo method. The verification results of the in aqua vivo method were statistically analyzed for 751 lung cancer patients treated with IMRT and 50 lung cancer patients treated with VMAT.Results: The improvements by applying the in aqua vivo approach are considerable. The percentage of gamma values </=1 increased on average from 66.2% to 93.1% and from 43.6% to 97.5% for the IMRT and VMAT cases, respectively. The corresponding mean gamma value decreased from 0.99 to 0.43 for the IMRT cases and from 1.71 to 0.40 for the VMAT cases, which is similar to the accepted clinical values for the verification of IMRT treatments of prostate, rectum, and head-and-neck cancers. The deviation between the reconstructed and planned dose at the isocenter diminished on average from 5.3% to 0.5% for the VMAT patients and was almost the same, within 1%, for the IMRT cases. The in aqua vivo verification results for IMRT and VMAT treatments of a large group of patients had a mean gamma of approximately 0.5, a percentage of gamma values </=1 larger than 89%, and a difference of the isocenter dose value less than 1%.Conclusions: With the in aqua vivo approach for the verification of lung cancer treatments (IMRT and VMAT), we can achieve results with the same accuracy as obtained during in vivo EPID dosimetry of sites without large inhomogeneities.


Title : Localization accuracy from automatic and semi-automatic rigid registration of locally-advanced lung cancer targets during image-guided radiation therapy.
Journal/Date : Med Phys. 2012 Jan;39(1):330.	 Pubmed Id: 22225303
Abstract : Purpose: To evaluate localization accuracy resulting from rigid registration of locally-advanced lung cancer targets using fully automatic and semi-automatic protocols for image-guided radiation therapy.Methods: Seventeen lung cancer patients, fourteen also presenting with involved lymph nodes, received computed tomography (CT) scans once per week throughout treatment under active breathing control. A physician contoured both lung and lymph node targets for all weekly scans. Various automatic and semi-automatic rigid registration techniques were then performed for both individual and simultaneous alignments of the primary gross tumor volume (GTV(P)) and involved lymph nodes (GTV(LN)) to simulate the localization process in image-guided radiation therapy. Techniques included "standard" (direct registration of weekly images to a planning CT), "seeded" (manual prealignment of targets to guide standard registration), "transitive-based" (alignment of pretreatment and planning CTs through one or more intermediate images), and "rereferenced" (designation of a new reference image for registration). Localization error (LE) was assessed as the residual centroid and border distances between targets from planning and weekly CTs after registration.Results: Initial bony alignment resulted in centroid LE of 7.3 +/- 5.4 mm and 5.4 +/- 3.4 mm for the GTV(P) and GTV(LN), respectively. Compared to bony alignment, transitive-based and seeded registrations significantly reduced GTV(P) centroid LE to 4.7 +/- 3.7 mm (p = 0.011) and 4.3 +/- 2.5 mm (p < 1 x 10(-3)), respectively, but the smallest GTV(P) LE of 2.4 +/- 2.1 mm was provided by rereferenced registration (p < 1 x 10(-6)). Standard registration significantly reduced GTV(LN) centroid LE to 3.2 +/- 2.5 mm (p < 1 x 10(-3)) compared to bony alignment, with little additional gain offered by the other registration techniques. For simultaneous target alignment, centroid LE as low as 3.9 +/- 2.7 mm and 3.8 +/- 2.3 mm were achieved for the GTV(P) and GTV(LN), respectively, using rereferenced registration.Conclusions: Target shape, volume, and configuration changes during radiation therapy limited the accuracy of standard rigid registration for image-guided localization in locally-advanced lung cancer. Significant error reductions were possible using other rigid registration techniques, with LE approaching the lower limit imposed by interfraction target variability throughout treatment.


Title : Use of weekly 4DCT-based ventilation maps to quantify changes in lung function for patients undergoing radiation therapy.
Journal/Date : Med Phys. 2012 Jan;39(1):289.	 Pubmed Id: 22225299
Abstract : Purpose: A method has been proposed to calculate ventilation maps from four-dimensional computed tomography (4DCT) images. Weekly 4DCT data were acquired throughout the course of radiation therapy for patients with lung cancer. The purpose of our work was to use ventilation maps calculated from weekly 4DCT data to study how ventilation changed throughout radiation therapy.Methods: Quantitative maps representing ventilation were generated for six patients. Deformable registration was used to link corresponding lung volume elements between the inhale and exhale phases of the 4DCT dataset. Following spatial registration, corresponding Hounsfield units were input into a density-change-based model for quantifying the local ventilation. The ventilation data for all weeks were registered to the pretreatment ventilation image set. We quantitatively analyzed the data by defining regions of interest (ROIs) according to dose (V(20)) and lung lobe and by tracking the weekly ventilation of each ROI throughout treatment. The slope of the linear fit to the weekly ventilation data was used to evaluate the change in ventilation throughout treatment. A positive slope indicated an increase in ventilation, a negative slope indicated a decrease in ventilation, and a slope of 0 indicated no change. The dose ROI ventilation and slope data were used to study how ventilation changed throughout treatment as a function of dose. The lung lobe ROI ventilation data were used to study the impact of the presence of tumor on pretreatment ventilation. In addition, the lobe ROI data were used to study the impact of tumor reduction on ventilation change throughout treatment.Results: Using the dose ROI data, we found that three patients had an increase in weekly ventilation as a function of dose (slopes of 1.1, 1.4, and 1.5) and three patients had no change or a slight decrease in ventilation as a function of dose (slopes of 0.3, -0.6, -0.5). Visually, pretreatment ventilation appeared to be lower in the lobes that contained tumor. Pretreatment ventilation was 39% for lobes that contained tumor and 54% for lobes that did not contain tumor. The difference in ventilation between the two groups was statistically significant (p = 0.017). When the weekly lobe ventilation data were qualitatively observed, two distinct patterns emerged. When the tumor volume in a lobe was reduced, ventilation increased in the lobe. When the tumor volume was not reduced, the ventilation distribution did not change. The average slope of the group of lobes that contained tumors that shrank was 1.18, while the average slope of the group that did not contain tumors (or contained tumors that did not shrink) was -0.32. The slopes for the two groups were significantly different (p = 0.014).Conclusions: We did not find a consistent pattern of ventilation change as a function of radiation dose. Pretreatment ventilation was significantly lower for lobes that contained tumor, due to occlusion of the central airway. The weekly lobe ventilation data indicated that when tumor volume shrinks, ventilation increases, and when the thoracic anatomy is not visibly changed, ventilation is likely to remain unchanged.


Title : A method for deriving a 4D-interpolated balanced planning target for mobile tumor radiotherapy.
Journal/Date : Med Phys. 2012 Jan;39(1):195.	 Pubmed Id: 22225288
Abstract : Purpose: Tumor control and normal tissue toxicity are strongly correlated to the tumor and normal tissue volumes receiving high prescribed dose levels in the course of radiotherapy. Planning target definition is, therefore, crucial to ensure favorable clinical outcomes. This is especially important for stereotactic body radiation therapy of lung cancers, characterized by high fractional doses and steep dose gradients. The shift in recent years from population-based to patient-specific treatment margins, as facilitated by the emergence of 4D medical imaging capabilities, is a major improvement. The commonly used motion-encompassing, or internal-target volume (ITV), target definition approach provides a high likelihood of coverage for the mobile tumor but inevitably exposes healthy tissue to high prescribed dose levels. The goal of this work was to generate an interpolated balanced planning target that takes into account both tumor coverage and normal tissue sparing from high prescribed dose levels, thereby improving on the ITV approach.Methods: For each 4DCT dataset, 4D deformable image registration was used to derive two bounding targets, namely, a 4D-intersection and a 4D-composite target which minimized normal tissue exposure to high prescribed dose levels and maximized tumor coverage, respectively. Through definition of an "effective overlap volume histogram" the authors derived an "interpolated balanced planning target" intended to balance normal tissue sparing from prescribed doses with tumor coverage. To demonstrate the dosimetric efficacy of the interpolated balanced planning target, the authors performed 4D treatment planning based on deformable image registration of 4D-CT data for five previously treated lung cancer patients. Two 4D plans were generated per patient, one based on the interpolated balanced planning target and the other based on the conventional ITV target. Plans were compared for tumor coverage and the degree of normal tissue sparing resulting from the new approach was quantified.Results: Analysis of the 4D dose distributions from all five patients showed that while achieving tumor coverage comparable to the ITV approach, the new planning target definition resulted in reductions of lung V(10), V(20), and V(30) of 6.3% +/- 1.7%, 10.6% +/- 3.9%, and 12.9% +/- 5.5%, respectively, as well as reductions in mean lung dose, mean dose to the GTV-ring and mean heart dose of 8.8% +/- 2.5%, 7.2% +/- 2.5%, and 10.6% +/- 3.6%, respectively.Conclusions: The authors have developed a simple and systematic approach to generate a 4D-interpolated balanced planning target volume that implicitly incorporates the dynamics of respiratory-organ motion without requiring 4D-dose computation or optimization. Preliminary results based on 4D-CT data of five previously treated lung patients showed that this new planning target approach may improve normal tissue sparing without sacrificing tumor coverage.


Title : DNA release and uptake associated with the development of pleomorphic cells in mammalian skin autotransplants.
Journal/Date : West Indian Med J. 2011 Jun;60(3):257-62.	 Pubmed Id: 22224335
Abstract : OBJECTIVE: Although several in vitro studies have demonstrated active release of DNA by living cells, there is still doubt. There are no such in vivo studies (1). The following experiment is an in vivo study to determine whether DNA release and uptake by cells and tissues occur and can be related to normal growth and differentiation, abnormal growth and cancer METHODS: Epidermal and full-thickness ear-skin grafts were separately autotransplanted into two groups of mice. In a second group, host mice were labelled with tritiated thymidine and autografted separately, with unlabelled epidermal and full-thickness ear-skin grafts. Animals were sacrificed regularly in both cases. RESULTS: Full thickness grafts revealed cysts in 15 out of 16 grafts, with well-differentiated squamous epidermis, DNA labelling of dermalfibroblasts and no DNA labelling of epidermal cells. Epidermal grafts revealed cysts in six out of 20 grafts, with epidermal cells variable in shape and arrangement; some appeared normal but others were two to four times larger, forming solid nests of cells. In some grafts, there were spindle-shaped pleomorphic cells loosely interconnected. DNA labelling was observed in occasional epidermal cell. Two lung adenocarcinomas were found. CONCLUSION: These results suggest active release of DNA by host cells and DNA uptake by grafted cells. This phenomenon and the differential uptake of DNA labelling of epidermal and dermal cells in the epidermal and full-thickness grafts suggest an association with abnormal, even pleomorphic epidermal cell behaviour due to the interference of dermal/epidermal interacting factors.


Title : Chest neoplasms with infectious etiologies.
Journal/Date : World J Radiol. 2011 Dec 28;3(12):279-88.	 Pubmed Id: 22224176
Abstract : A wide spectrum of thoracic tumors have known or suspected viral etiologies. Oncogenic viruses can be classified by the type of genomic material they contain. Neoplastic conditions found to have viral etiologies include post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease, lymphoid granulomatosis, Kaposi's sarcoma, Castleman's disease, recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, lung cancer, malignant mesothelioma, leukemia and lymphomas. Viruses involved in these conditions include Epstein-Barr virus, human herpes virus 8, human papillomavirus, Simian virus 40, human immunodeficiency virus, and Human T-lymphotropic virus. Imaging findings, epidemiology and mechanism of transmission for these diseases are reviewed in detail to gain a more thorough appreciation of disease pathophysiology for the chest radiologist.


Title : Which metastasis management allows long-term survival of synchronous solitary M1b non-small cell lung cancer?
Journal/Date : Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Jan 4.	 Pubmed Id: 22223700
Abstract : OBJECTIVESPatients with extrathoracic synchronous solitary metastasis and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are rare. The effectiveness of both tumour sites resection is difficult to evaluate because of the high variability among clinical studies. We reviewed our experience regarding the management and prognosis of these patients.METHODSThe charts of 4668 patients who underwent lung cancer surgery from 1983 to 2006 were retrospectively reviewed. We analysed the epidemiology, treatment, pathology and prognostic characteristics of those with extrathoracic synchronous solitary metastasis amenable to lung cancer surgery on a curative intend.RESULTSThere were 94 patients (sex ratio M/F 3.2/1, mean age 56 years). Surgery included pneumonectomy (n = 27), lobectomy (n = 65) and exploratory thoracotomy (n = 2). Pathology revealed adenocarcinomas (n = 57), squamous cell carcinoma (n = 20), large cell carcinoma (n = 14) and other NSCLC histology (n = 3). Lymphatic extension was N0 (n = 46), N1 (n = 17) and N2 (n = 31). Metastasis involved the brain (n = 57), adrenal gland (n = 12), bone (n = 14), liver (n = 5) and skin (n = 6). Sixty-nine metastases were resected. Five-year survival rate was 16% (median 13 months). Induction therapy, adenocarcinoma, N0 staging and lobectomy were criteria of better prognosis, but metastasis resection was not.CONCLUSIONSThese results suggest that extrathoracic synchronous solitary metastasis of pN0 adenocarcinoma may achieve long-term survival in the case of lung resection with or without metastasis resection. This pattern may reflect a specific tumour biology whose solitary metastasis benefits both from surgical or non-surgical treatment.


Title : The value of pleural lavage cytology examined during surgery for primary lung cancer.
Journal/Date : Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Jan 4.	 Pubmed Id: 22223692
Abstract : OBJECTIVESThe pleural invasion (PL) score is a useful prognostic indicator in lung cancer. However, in many cases, the cancer may exfoliate itself into the pleural cavity and may progress to a malignant pleural effusion without invading the parietal pleura. This stage is not currently evaluated, but it is detectable by means of the pleural lavage cytology (PLC). However, PLC's contribution to TNM staging has not yet been clarified. The purpose of this investigation was to demonstrate the usefulness of PLC in the precise staging of patients with such an occult pleural dissemination.METHODSA total of 3231 patients who were included in a multi-institutional database were studied retrospectively. PLC was performed by washing the thoracic cavity with a small amount of physiological saline immediately after opening the thoracic cavity during lung cancer surgery.RESULTSThe incidence of positive PLC findings was 4.58%. In comparison with the negative group, the survival curves were significantly worse (P < 0.001) and the incidence of recurrence with pleuritis carcinomatosa was significantly higher (P < 0.001). According to the subset analysis, the survival difference was prominent in earlier stage groups and lower PL score groups. The positive findings were confirmed to be a significantly poor prognostic indicator (P = 0.016) by multivariate analysis using the Cox proportional hazard model (Cox analysis). However, integration of the positive findings with the PL score was attempted for the convenience of TNM staging. To find the accurate PL score for positive PLC findings, the Cox analysis was re-estimated using the PL score upgraded stepwise. The most reliable model with the highest score for the likelihood ratio chi(2) statistic was obtained by scoring positive findings as PL3. So, it was considered to be the most reliable conversion.CONCLUSIONSExamining PLC in clinical practice is useful for detecting occult pleural dissemination before the appearance of a malignant pleural effusion. Evidence of positive findings should be treated as supplemental information to the precise diagnosis of TNM staging. Scoring positive PLC findings as PL3 (=T3) was appropriate.


Title : Inhibition of collagen receptor Discoidin Domain Receptor-1 (DDR1) Reduces Cell Survival, Homing and Colonization in Lung Cancer Bone Metastasis.
Journal/Date : Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 5.	 Pubmed Id: 22223527
Abstract : PURPOSE:  We investigated the role of the collagen binding receptor, discoidin domain receptor-1 (DDR1), in the initiation and development of bone metastasis. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed westernblot analysis and phosphorylation status in a panel of human lung cancer cell lines and immunohistochemical analysis in a cohort of 83 lung cancer specimens. Adhesion, chemotaxis, invasiveness, metalloproteolytic, osteoclastogenic and apoptotic assays were performed in DDR1 silenced cells. In vivo, metastatic osseous homing and colonization was assessed in a murine model of metastasis.RESULTS: DDR1 was expressed in a panel of human lung cancer cell lines and high DDR1 levels in human lung tumors were associated with poor survival. Knock-down (shDDR1) cells displayed unaltered growth kinetics in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, shDDR1 cells showed reduced invasiveness in collagen matrices and increased basal and induced apoptosis in vitro. More importantly, conditioned media of DDR1 knock down cells decreased osteoclastogenic activity in vitro. Consequently, in a model of tumor metastasis to bone, lack of DDR1 showed decreased metastatic activity associated with reduced tumor burden and osteolytic lesions. These effects were consistent with a substantial reduction in the number of cells reaching the bone compartment. Moreover, intratibial injection of shDDR1 cells significantly decreased bone tumor burden, suggesting impaired colonization ability that was highly dependent on the bone microenvironment. CONCLUSIONS:  Disruption of DDR1 hampers tumor cell survival, leading to impaired early tumor-bone engagement during skeletal homing. Furthermore, inhibition of DDR1 crucially alters bone colonization. We suggest that DDR1 represents a novel therapeutic target involved in bone metastasis.


Title : EGFR mutations in non-small-cell lung cancer among smokers and non-smokers: A meta-analysis.
Journal/Date : Environ Mol Mutagen. 2012 Jan;53(1):78-82. doi: 10.1002/em.20680. Epub 2011 Aug 29.	 Pubmed Id: 22223435
Abstract : Mounting evidence has suggested somatic mutations in the EGFR gene are associated with better responsiveness to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Some, but not all, studies have reported that the mutations were more frequently observed in patients without a smoking history. To comprehensively address this issue, we performed a meta-analysis to evaluate the association between cigarette-smoking history and mutation of the EGFR gene in NSCLC. Twenty-six studies, involving 3,688 patients with NSCLC were included in the analysis. The pooled analysis shows that the incidence of EGFR mutations in NSCLC differs according to cigarette-smoking history. The odds ratio (OR) for the EGFR mutation in non-smokers relative to smokers was 4.829 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 3.598-6.482; P < 0.001). These data may assist clinicians in assessing the likelihood of EGFR mutations in patients with NSCLC when mutational analysis is not feasible. Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 2012. (c) 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.


Title : Lung adenocarcinoma clinical stage is associated with gene expression pattern in non-involved lung tissue.
Journal/Date : Int J Cancer. 2012 Jan 5. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27426.	 Pubmed Id: 22223368
Abstract : Associations between clinical outcome of cancer patients and the gene expression signature in primary tumors at time of diagnosis have been reported. To test whether gene expression patterns in non-involved lung tissue might correlate with clinical stage in lung adenocarcinoma (ADCA) patients, we compared the transcriptome of non-involved lung samples from 60 ADCA smoker patients of clinical stage I versus 60 patients with stage >I. Quantitative PCR of 10 genes with the most significant differential expression confirmed the statistical association with clinical stage in 8 genes, 6 of which were downregulated in highstage patients. Five of these 6 genes were also downregulated in lung ADCA tissue as compared to non-involved tissue. Studies in vitro indicated that 4 of the genes (SLC14A1, SMAD6, TMEM100, and TXNIP) inhibited colony formation of lung cancer cell lines transfected to overexpress the genes, suggesting their potential tumor-suppressor activity. Our findings suggest that individual variations in the transcriptional profile of non-involved lung tissue may reflect the lung ADCA patient's predisposition to tumor aggressiveness.


Title : Multiple Pulmonary Nodules in Ectopic Adrenocorticotropic Hormone Syndrome: Cause or Result?
Journal/Date : Med Princ Pract. 2012 Jan 5.	 Pubmed Id: 22223082
Abstract : Objective: To report a case of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis mimicking lung cancer with lung to lung metastases in ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone syndrome (EAS). Clinical Presentation and Intervention: A 60-year-old man suffering from hypokalemic alkalosis, hypertension and limbs paralysis was referred to our hospital. EAS caused by malignancy of lung was highly suspected due to multiple pulmonary nodules presenting on chest film and positron emission tomography (PET) images. Video-assisted thoracic surgical biopsy tissue was used to confirm invasive aspergillosis instead of malignancy. Finally, the patient died of opportunistic infection. Conclusion: This case showed that although EAS is usually associated with solid tumors, multiple pulmonary nodules secondary to opportunistic infections such as invasive aspergillosis must be kept in mind.


